# Getting Started

> Chapter 3, Startup Owner's Manual
>
> Hypothesis-Driven Entrepreneurship: The Lean Startup

## Rules of Customer Development (The Customer Development Manifesto)

## Rule 1: There are no facts inside your building, so get outside

Customer Research (where we gather firsthand experience in collaboration with (future) customers) must be done by founders because:

- Key customer feedback points are random, unpredictable, and often painful to hear. Employees hate to deliver bad news to higher-ups.
- It's too easy to dismiss findings by non-founder employees as "hearsay" or to ignore critical points of feedback.

Only a founder can embrace the feedback, react to it, and adeptly make the decisions necessary to change or pivot key business model components.

## Rule 2: Pair Customer Development with Agile Development

Customer Development is useless unless product development can iterate on the product with speed and agility (e.g. not waterfall).

## Rule 3: Failure is an Integral Part of the Search

Startups go from failure to failure. We're searching, not executing, and the only way to find the right path is to try lots of experiments and take a lot of wrong turns.

## Rule 4: Make Continuous Iterations and Pivots

Embrace failure and pivot often. A pivot is a substantial change in one or more of the nine boxes of the business model canvas. For example, a pricing change from freemium to a subscription model.

## Rule 5: No Business Plan survives First Contact with Customers. So Use a Business Model Canvas

A business plan exists for only one reason: Some investor who went to business school doesn't know any better and wants to see one. Entrepreneurs often mistake their business plan as a cookbook for execution, failing to recognize that it is only a collection of unproven assumptions.

**The difference between a static business plan and a dynamic model could well be the difference between flameout and success**.

**Startups should dump the business *plan* and adopt the flexible business _model_**.

### Business model components

- *Value proposition*, which the company offers (product/service/benefits).
- *Customer segments*, such as users, and payers, or moms and teens.
- *Distribution channels* to reach customers and offer them the value proposition.
- *Customer relationships* to create demand.
- *Revenue streams* generated by the value proposition(s).
- *Resources* needed to make the business model possible.
- *Activities* necessary to implement the business model.
- *Partners* who participate in the business and their motivations for doing so.
- *Cost structure* resulting from the business model.

## Rule 6: Design Experiments and Test to Validate your hypotheses

To turn hypotheses into facts, founders need to get out of the building and test them in front of customers. How? What do you want to learn? You have to thoughtfully construct and design the tests.

## Rule 7: Agree on Market Type. It Changes Everything

The new product offered by a startup enters a market.

- It may be an existing market
- It may be a new market
- It may be an existing market, but the product may re-segment that market as a low-cost entrant or as a niche entrant.
- It may be cloning a business model that's successful in another country.

The Market type influences *everything* a company does. Because: Strategy and tactics that work for one market type rarely work for another.

### Existing markets

This is where customers exist already. Marketing is relatively easy: users can describe the market and the attributes that matter the most to them. The new product typically solves one or more problems better/cheaper/faster than competing products. Everything the startup does are directly comparable to competitors within the same market.

### New Markets

Here, a company let's customers do something they couldn't do before by creating something that never existed before. Or it dramatically lowers costs to create a new class of users.

Since this is a greenfield territory, it is naturally harder to create user demand and market the product. The key here is not competing, like it is with an existing market, but rather discovering whether a large customer base exists and whether customers can be persuaded to buy.

"Fast-burn" is a great strategy in an existing market, but not in a new market. Instead, the spending on sales and marketing should be minimal while in "search" mode (until discovering a business model that is scalable and repeatable).

### Re-segmenting an existing market

Useful when the incumbent is too difficult to attack head on (for example Facebook or Google). Usually you would take either a *low-cost* strategy or a *nice* strategy take take a bite of the incumbents market share and eat from their user base.

### Cloning an existing business model (e.g. the Chinese way)

You can clone an existing business model and apply it to a new market. For example, copy everything Facebook does and launch a clone on the Chinese market ;-).

## Rule 8: Startup Metrics Differ from Those in Existing Companies

For big businesses, we need balance sheets, cash-flow forecasts and other stuff. When we're in the startup stage, however, we should focus instead on tracking the startup's progress converting guesses and hypotheses into facts rather than measuring the execution of a static plan. It must be *worth it* to scale a business model into a company.

Only cash-burn rate and number of month's worth of cash left as well as other short-term things such as hiring plans and time to break-even should be considered in a startup.

## Rule 9: Fast Decision-Making, Cycle Time, Speed and Tempo

Speed matters at startups: The only absolute certainty there is that the bank balance declines every day.

"Learn, build, pivot" must happen on fast cycles to ensure that the cash last as long as possible.

## Rule 10: It's all about Passion

"Startup People" are different. They Think Different (I see what you did there).

## Rule 11: Startup Job Titles are Very Different from a Large Companies

The author of the book doesn't like job titles that reflect the way tasks are organized in a startup simply because it is too early to divide it up into functional departments (when in "search" mode). Rather, it wants everyone to be part of the "Customer Development" team, and that's it.

## Rule 12: Preserve all Cash until needed. Then spend

When a repeatable and scalable business model has been found - then spend like there's no tomorrow.
The Customer Development process preserves cash by not hiring any sales and marketing staff until the founders turn hypotheses into facts and discover a viable product/market fit.

We're not interested in one-off revenue hits, but for a *pattern*. Otherwise, we can't speak to if its scalable or not.

## Rule 13: Communicate and Share Learning

It is so important to share and communicate the discoveries and learnings from outside the building with employees, co-founders **and even investors**.

## Rule 14: Customer Development Success Begins with a Buy-In

For Customer Development to succeed, everyone on the team - from investor/parent company to engineers, marketeers and founders - need to understand and agree that the Customer Development process is different than the traditional approach of *executing a plan*. If anyone, for example the VP of engineering, is talking about waterfall or a rigid timetable, it is destined to fail.

## Hypothesis-Driven Entrepreneurship: The Lean Startup

When following a hypothesis-driven approach, the entrepreneur translates his/her vision into **falsifiable business model hypotheses**, and then tests those using a series of **minimum viable products**. Each MVP represents the smallest set of activities needed to **disprove a hypothesis**.

Based on the feedback, an entrepreneur must decide whether to persevere with the proposed business model, pivot to a revised model that changes some model elements, or simply *perish* (abandon the business venture entirely).

This process is repeated until the startup has achieved *product-market fit*: It has a product that profitably meets the needs of the target market's customers, and can commence scaling.

### Lean Startup

A *Lean startup* is an organization that **follow the principles of hypothesis-driven entrepreneurship**.

**Lean is often mistakenly understood as meaning a startup that keeps costs to a bare minimum and relying only on its founder's personal resources**. But that is not what is understood by *lean* in this regard.

### Hypothesis-Driven Development: Process Steps

Follow this and get the $$$:

[!Hypothesis-Driven Entrepreneurship Process Steps](./asset/hypothesis_driven_entrepreneurship_process_steps.png)

#### Customer Value Proposition questions

- What unmet needs will the venture serve?
- Which customer segments will it target?
- Will it emphasize differentiation or low cost?
- Will it serve a new or existing market?
- What will be the minimum viable product at launch? The roadmap for adding features?
- Who will provide complements required for a whole product solution? On what terms?
- How will the product be priced? Does skimming or penetration pricing make sense?
- Can the venture leverage price discrimination methods? Bundling? Network effects?
- What switching costs will customers incur? What is the expected life of a customer relationship?
- Relative to rivals’ products, how will customers’ willingness to pay compare to their total cost of ownership?

#### Go-To-Market plan questions

- What mix of direct and indirect channels will the venture employ? What margin and/or exclusive rights will channel partners require?
- Given expected customer lifetime value (LTV), what customer acquisition cost (CAC) will the venture target?
- What mix of free and paid demand generation methods will the venture employ? What will be the shape of its customer conversion funnel? The CAC for each paid method?
- If the venture relies on free demand generation methods, what will be its viral coefficient?
- Will the venture confront a chasm between early adopter and early mainstream segments? If so, what is the plan for crossing the chasm?
- Does the venture have strong incentives to race for scale due to network effects, high switching costs, or other first mover advantages? Do scalability constraints and late mover advantages offset these incentives?

#### Technology & Operations Management questions

- What activities are required to develop and produce the venture’s product?
- Which activities will the venture perform in-house and which will it outsource?
- Who will perform outsourced activities, and under what terms?
- What are the cost drivers for key activities? Can the venture exploit scale economies in production by substituting fixed for variable costs?
- Will the venture create any valuable intellectual property? If so, how will it be kept proprietary?
- Are there other first mover advantages in technology & operations (e.g., preemption of scarce inputs)? Late mover advantages (e.g., reverse engineering)?
- Given capacity and hiring constrains, can the venture scale operations rapidly?

#### Cash Flow Formula

- What contribution margin will the venture earn?
- What fixed costs will the venture incur, and what breakeven capacity utilization and sales volume does this imply?
- What share of the total addressable market does breakeven sales volume represent?
- How much investment in working capital and property, plant & equipment will be required per dollar of revenue?
- How will contribution margins, fixed costs, and investment/revenue ratios change over time?
- Given projected growth, will be the profile of the venture’s cash flow curve? How deep is the curve’s trough, and when will it be reached?

#### Step 1: Develop a Vision

There must be some problem to solve and a potential solution for that problem. This initial step of developing a vision is called *ideation*.

#### Step 2: Translate the Vision into Hypotheses

With that vision, the entrepreneur translates it into falsifiable business model hypotheses. A business model is an integrated array of distinctive choices specifying a new venture's unique customer value proposition and how it will configure activities to deliver that value and earn sustainable profits.

#### Step 3: Specify MVP Tests (Launch early and often)

By specifying a Minimum Viable Product (MVP), which is the smallest set of features and/or activities needed to complete what can be called a Build-Measure-Learn cycle, it can be used to test a business model hypothesis:

By launching a series of MVPs, an entrepreneur reduces product development batch sizes and cycle times, yielding two benefits:

1. Short development cycles accelerate feedback. (= Don't build the wrong things)
2. Releasing feature revisions in small batches makes it easier to interpret test results and to diagnose problems.

#### Step 4: Prioritize Tests

The tests that has been developed to validate the business model with MVPs must be prioritized in terms of sequence order.

Tests that can eliminate considerable risk at a low cost should be prioritized. Some tests depend on each others success. If A fails, then there is no point in doing B. That's why order matters. To not waste time and resources.

#### Step 5: Learn from the MVP Tests

Beware of false negatives false positives. Don't react to people's *stated* preferences, but to their *revealed* preferences. For example, back when Facebook designed the News Feed, the users stated that they hated it and protested. However, Facebook kept it simply because the stats showed that they loved it. People don't really know what they want, even if they think so.

Also beware of cognitive bias from the founder/test reviewer here.

#### Step 6: Persevere, Pivot, or Perish

- **Persevere**: If the MVP validates the business model hypothesis and other feedback does not prompt a shift in direction, then persevere on the current path! Test remaining hypotheses if there are any, or scale if there isn't.
- **Pivot**: If the MVP test rejects the business model hypothesis or if it validates the hypothesis but it shows that greater opportunity lies elsewhere, then you might want to pivot! Back to the drawing board.
- **Perish**: If the MVP test decisively rejects a crucial business model hypothesis, you may want to shut down the business.

#### Step 7: Scaling and Ongoing Optimization

Just Ship It. Just Do It. Release Me.